Let me ask you about Travis, Kayla,
and maybe a few of the other athletes you've been involved with.
So first Travis, Travis Stevens,
Olympic silver medalist, three time Olympian,
2008, 2012, 2016.
What makes Travis Stevens great.
What makes him so successful?
What makes him unique in your mind as an athlete through all the hardships he
had to overcome through is a weird looking,
saying Augie that, uh, eventually worked out nicely through the,
the full richness of his personality in the context of all the other great
athletes you've coached. What makes him special?
His fight. Travis has fight and you know,
the first time I ever saw Travis Stevens was in like recognized him.
Maybe I had seen him before as a younger boy or something,
but like actually recognized him is I brought a group of young kids to
Italy for a competition in a training camp.
And it was this program called you 23 elite.
And I picked handpicked 20 kids to go to this event.
And it was the first time I coached, uh, an international team.
And I had never seen Travis fight before compete, train anything.
And during this competition, no, he's an 81 keel player.
I think he was maybe like 18 years old, um, 17,
18 years old. And it was a really hard European event.
And I think Travis won three matches and he lost two.
But what stood out the most to me was like the fight he had in him.
He was scrapping every fight. Like he scrapped hard.
Like he wanted to win more than any of them. Right. He didn't win,
but he wanted to win more. And I, and I noticed that right away.
And then I also noticed that after he lost his second match and he was
eliminated from the tournament, I saw how disappointed he wasn't himself.
Like he actually thought he was supposed to beat those people,
even though he was like 17, right. And he's fighting against grown men that are,
you know, a high level judo, much higher than he was. And I said to him, I said,
Hey son, like, don't worry, man. You got a long career ahead of you. Like,
I'm glad you're disappointed, but there's so many things you don't know.
And so many skills,
you don't have the fact that you were able to hold your own and scrap like that.
Like you've got a good future. And I remember calling my friend, Jason Morris,
after that tournament. And I said, Hey man, did you ever hear this kid?
Travis Stevens? He says, no. Why? I said, man, that kid's got some fight in him.
Right. And I said that,
I said that to Jason at the time I said that kid's got some fight in him, man.
He's pretty talented, you know? And that's how it started. Um,
but so I saw that I met when he was young, but the other thing was Travis.
Like there's no, there's no such thing as hard work to that guy.
If you tell him to put his head through the wall and I'll help.
And that's how he wins, he'll go put his head through the wall.
He'll do whatever it takes for him to do to achieve
success.
And he hates failure more than he
likes winning 100%. He always has he punishes himself when he doesn't do well,
he makes himself work harder. He goes in, you know,
just on abuses himself when he doesn't, when he doesn't succeed,
because he's so heartbroken and disappointed in himself.
So that's a trait that I think all of the athletes that I work with,
like closely though, they all had that same trait.
They hated losing more than anything. They would, they would break their arm.
They'd fall on their head. You know,
they'd rather get hit by a car than lose a judo tournament. Yeah.
And as a result, then they all had fight and they all were willing to train.
They were willing to listen and they would do anything for victory, you know,
within, you know, within the rules,
I'm not talking about taking drugs or anything like that, but they would,
they'd give a hundred percent of themselves for victory. And you know,
Travis was somebody that when he was down, he found a way to do,
to get better doing something else. If he couldn't do standing,
that's when he started jujitsu, he couldn't go on his feet anymore.
He couldn't stand up and train. My mind was, well,
go learn jujitsu and get good on the ground. Right. Because I can't, you know,
so he always found a way in, no matter what obstacle was in his way,
he just went around it.
So what about the interesting to get your perspective?
Because I know Travis has perspective is the,
just the number of injuries,
like what do you make of the perseverance through all the injuries you had to
overcome specifically?
Like you just observing this creature that you've coached. I mean,
he seems to not see the injuries as, as a problem. He just like,
just think you said head through the wall. It's like, what? Like when I,
when we were talking about injuries, he kinda,
he doesn't even see the injuries themselves as the problem because he thinks
that the injuries, you know, you heal back stronger.
I forget the exact quote, but he said like, my body is,
is now less injury prone than most of anyone else, because.
I've already broken.
Broken. And it was just growing back stronger. Like,
cause I asked him something like,
do you regret sort of pushing your body to all of those places that
resulted in those injuries. And he was, his response was like, no,
I'm stronger now. Right. So I don't know if that's justification,
but that certainly describes a mindset that yeah.
Head through the wall that doesn't, uh,
it's almost not dramatic. Like, look,
I got this injury it's so I'm so like brave and special for overcoming this
injury. He's just, he's just, that's part of the job. And he gets the job done.
But like that job of box a lottery.
One of the talks I gave Travis and that team at that,
at that particular tournament was at the very beginning of the camp after the
tournament, I said to them, listen, my, my vision shared my vision with them.
I said, my vision is, you know, in seven years, cause that was 2005.
I said in seven years, I want to have a U S team that steps on the mat.
It is ready to kick. And in order to get there,
all of you guys can be a part of this team and part of this process.
But in order to get there, you guys have to be the first ones to practice.
You have to be the last ones to leave.
Cause we have to work harder than the rest of the world because we're up against
all odds. I said,
I am sick of America being a laughing stock of judo and being the first round,
easy match up for everybody else. I said,
if you get injured, you're not going to be on the side with, with, you know,
with an ice bag on taking off rounds and then get back on the mat the next day
and tell me you're okay. If you can train the next day, you can train today.
So there's no injury.
The only time you'll leave in this dojo is if the ambulance has to take you out
of here, you know? And I,
and I do think subliminally Travis bought into that message and heard that
message. Then instead of I'm going to be a champion,
that's the way I'm going to do it. And he did. And he, he embodied it.
He lived it, man. There were many times in Europe where I said, dude,
just tape it up. I'll go off to the side. Just take the day off.
Like take the rest of the day off. You're beat up. You can't do it. He's not,
I'm going to tape it up on the two belts. No, you don't need to right now.
And he said, no sensei, I'm doing it.
You know the ambulance isn't taking me out. It just my, just my wrist.
It's just my ankle. It's just my chest, my ankle.
You know? It's. Yeah. I love it. Yeah. What about the,
so the other really big thing is you comment on a little bit,
is the weight cut so early in his career,
he was 81 kg and that was presumably not so
difficult, but later in his career,
he is 81 kg and it's becoming more and more difficult.
So that's, that's the other thing with him is, uh,
so I've known a lot of really,
really tough people at the highest levels broken by the way, cut,
like that can break the toughest minds and it doesn't seem to have broken him
and he's delivered on it often on like insane weight cuts.
So, um, just as a coach,
what do you think about his particularly his mind and the challenge of the way
cut.
It was part of his process.
It was part of his way of getting ready for battle suffering.
It really was. And if I'm going to suffer this much,
then I'm going to make my opponents pay for all the suffering that I went
through to get here. That was his mindset, um,
later on in his career you're right. Like a lot of times Travis,
he would never step on a scale, you know, until he got to the tournament,
you know, and even when he get to the tournament, uh, he'd weigh like 90 heels.
He'd show up at the tournament, nine kilos over I'm like, you know, you have to,
but I never, it was just an expectation of making weight,
not making weight was never an option for any of our athletes.
And Travis knew it. And he said, as a professional,
my job is to make weight. If I don't make weight, he, you know, he,
he was never gonna allow that to happen.
And he was never going to allow us to come to him and say, Hey, I told you,
you know, cause he losing, wasn't an option, making a weight.
Wasn't not making weight was not an option for him ever either. But you know,
a lot of times he wouldn't even, he'd be nine kilos over on the plane,
going over to the tournament and have to make wait three days later, you know?
And he didn't break 86 kilos until the day before the tournament.
But he had five kilos over the day before that was his way.
But he would do three workouts. You know, the wake up in the morning workout,
then he'd eat. Then he worked out in the afternoon, then he'd eat again.
Then he he'd work out again at night and then he'd reward himself. Hey,
I worked out three times today. He'd go have a, you know, a, a mountain Dew,
you know, or chocolate bar, you know, and then he's next morning,
he's back up to 87 and he would never touch wait until
the morning of lands. That that's when he,
that he wasn't on weight for more than like five minutes.
His process will break a lot of people. So the fact that he got the job done is.
Not just the job done,
but every single time he got the job done and I made those athletes fight.
We would fight in Paris.
We would do a camp for a week double session camp for a week.
He'd be seven kilos over half the fight. The next weekend,
we're talking two or three days later. So not only did he make the weight,
but he did a grueling training camp twice a day and then cut weight and
then fought again.
Then did another camp for a week in double session training camp and then fought
on a third weekend in a row. And our athletes went through hell. You know,
all of our athletes went through hell because on the tour, around the world,
they fought in every event, they did every camp. They fought in every event.
Whereas most of the other teams like Japan comes in and fights in Paris.
Then they go home. They maybe do a camp for three days. Then they go home.
They don't stay in Europe for four or five weeks straight and fighting every
tournament. And when you get to Germany, the Germans skipped the French open.
They skipped the camp in France. They're just getting ready for Germany.
Our athletes already had two competitions, two training camps,
two with three-way cuts now. And then,
so they're not a hundred percent when they fight in Germany,
but that's all part of the experience. They need the training that they need,
that they don't get here in the, in, in this country.
And all of those would just preparation for a world championships or Olympic
games. So by the time our athletes got to those tournaments,
they felt so strong. So rested. So like, man,
this guy that felt like a monster in Germany,
he feels like nothing today because you're fully rested now, you know.
But part of the challenge is because the American team is smaller and more,
I mean, just smaller is, um, you know,
all the different places you go for to do the weight, cut, to do the diet,
to do the preparation or the recovery.
There's like that process changes every time.
So you basically have to improvise a lot. Oh yeah.
You show up to a hotel and how you do the Waco. You don't know, and this,
the different weather conditions, it's not, it's like, um,
so what is it Rocky versus Drago, right? So you don't have,
you have to just improvise.
And that's also a fascinating part of the American judo story, which is like,
you have to improvise more.
Well, I was funny cause when I was 1990 and it was at the Goodwill games.
Right. And uh, we were, it was a U S Olympic committee type event.
And so we're on the bus with the swim team and it was me and Jason Morris on the
American team. And we're going to the judo competition,
but we're on the bus with the swim team. Uh,
so we're going through the venue where we're staying.
And I remember being like by ourselves with no staff, no, no, no manager,
no coach. We're just by ourselves going to fight in Russia. Right. And uh,
in the swim teams on their,
with their full sweats and their staff and like their managers. And I,
I heard the lady, the girl go, oh, sorry, this is 1994. Cause it was in St.
Petersburg, Russia. So I heard the girl on the team, she goes up to the coach.
He goes, coach. Um,
do you think he can send the massage therapist to my room at 10:00 AM? You know,
I'm feeling kind of jet lag. I looked at Jason,
[inaudible] like still
beside it won't even have a staff. Like what the hell is going on here?
You know, what a difference in yeah. Sporting, you know,
different sports within the same country, you know?
I mean, not the romanticized things,
but that you do represent the spirit of the Olympics when you're kind of the,
the improvisational nature of it. Cause it, it is just you,
you and sometimes you and the coach and just pure guts
and you against the world with no money, the warrior spirit,
the warrior spirit.